Initial Developer Documentation (#148)
10up/plugin-check: docs/creating-a-static-check.md

# Creating a Static Check

Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugin's codebase.

The Static checks, which analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;

class Custom_Check extends Static_Check {
  public function run( Check_Result $result );
    // Handle running the check and adding warnings or errors to the result.

>   }

Reviewer: Apply similar feedback that i raise for `Runtime Check`

Author: Thanks @mukeshpanchal27 I've added this here

# Creating a Static Check

Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugin's codebase.

> The Static checks, which analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Static checks analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.
```

Author: Thanks @felixarntz updated

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Static_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

> class Custom_Check extends Static_Check {

Reviewer 2: We need to make sure test code actually works. This here would cause a fatal error.

Also maybe use something like `My_Custom_Check` to make it more specific and more obvious that it is an example.
```suggestion
class My_Custom_Check implements Static_Check {
```

Author: Thanks @felixarntz updated

  use Stable_Check;
  
  public function get_categories() {

>     // Return an array of check categories.

Reviewer 2: Maybe to clarify:
```suggestion
    // Return an array of check categories.
    // See the `WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories` class for available categories.
```

Author: This has been updated

  }

  public function run( Check_Result $result );
    // Handle running the check and adding warnings or errors to the result.
  }
}
```

Here are two more concrete ways to write static checks.

## Creating a new Check using PHP CodeSniffer.

A new Check class should be created for the static check and should implement the following attributes.

- The class name should be suffixed with `_Check`.
- The class should extend the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class.
- The class should implement the `get_args()` method.

## Creating a new Check using Abstract_File_Check.

A new Check class should be created for the static check and should implement the following attributes.

- The class name should be suffixed with `_Check`.
- The class should extend the `Abstract_File_Check` class.

> - The class should implement the `check_files()` method.

Reviewer 2: I think the only thing needed in both the lists here is the specific class to extend. It's not really a requirement that class names end in `_Check,` and the specific methods to implement are clear due to extending the specific class.

I would suggest to reword this to much less text, but then include two code examples similar to the above.
```suggestion
## Creating a new check using PHP CodeSniffer

A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class. Here is an example:

// Code example here.

## Creating a new check using file search for strings / regular expressions

A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_File_Check` class. Here is an example:

// Code example here.
```

Author: Thanks @felixarntz this was updated

### PHPCS Arguments

Rather than write all the logic required to run PHPCS, the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` handles this logic so developers only need to supply the arguements to PHPCS in order to get their check working.

This is done by implementing the `get_args()` method in the new Check class defined within the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check`.

The `get_args()` method should return an associative array containing the PHPCS arguments including the file extension, code standard and specific sniff to run.

> Below is an example of a Static Check class that checks for i18n usage in the plugins codebase.

Reviewer 2: All this content isn't really needed now, since the above section on writing a PHPCodeSniffer check already outlines it.

I think you can remove this section entirely, however see my comment above regarding code examples. For the PHPCodeSniffer check example, you can probably simply use the one below here.

Author: Thanks @felixarntz this was removed.

```php

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Checks\Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

/**
 * Check for running WordPress internationalization sniffs.
 */

> class I18n_Usage_Check extends Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check {

Reviewer 2: This example is an existing check, we should rather focus on an imaginary check. For example, keep using something like `My_Custom_Check`, and then also use another sniff from PHPCodeSniffer. This is just an example, so we can be creative.

Author: Thanks @felixarntz I've updated the code examples to use the `My_Custom_Check`

  
  use Stable_Check;

  /**
   * Gets the categories for the check.
   *
   * Every check must have at least one category.
   *
   * @since n.e.x.t
   *
   * @return array The categories for the check.
   */
  public function get_categories() {
    return array( Check_Categories::CATEGORY_GENERAL );
  }

  /**
   * Returns an associative array of arguments to pass to PHPCS.
   *
   * @return array An associative array of PHPCS CLI arguments.
   */
  protected function get_args() {
    return array(
      'extensions' => 'php',
      'standard'   => 'WordPress',
      'sniffs'     => 'WordPress.WP.I18n',
    );
  }
}
```

## Add the Check to the Plugin Checker

> In order to run the check as part of the Plugin Checker process it needs to be added to the Plugin Checkers list of available checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to run the check as part of the Plugin Checker process, it needs to be added to the Plugin Checker's list of available checks.
```

Author: Updated

> This is done by using the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter to register an instance of the check with its slug.
> 
> - If you're contributing to the actual plugin checker, add the check to the list in the `Abstract_Check_Runner::register_checks()` method.
> - If you're implementing a check in code outside of the actual plugin checker, use the approach you've described here so far.

Reviewer 2: This is confusing because you mention the filter in the beginning although it only applies to the second bullet point. Consider this instead:
```suggestion
- If you're contributing to the actual plugin checker, add the check to the list in the `Abstract_Check_Runner::register_checks()` method.
- If you're implementing a check in code outside of the actual plugin checker, use the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter, as seen in the example below.
```

Author: Updated

```php
add_filter(
  'wp_plugin_check_checks',
  function ( array $checks ) {
    // Add the check to the map of all available checks.

>     $checks[ 'i18n_usage' ] = new I18n_Usage_Check();

Reviewer 2: Nit-pick: WP coding standards don't allow spaces around non-variable keys. But also, better to use an imaginary check name here, e.g. similar to the above:
```suggestion
    $checks['my_custom_check'] = new My_Custom_Check();
```

Author: Updated

    return $checks;
  }

> )

Reviewer 2: This would cause a fatal error since it is missing the semicolon. See above, we need to make sure the code examples here actually work.
```suggestion
);
```

Author: Thanks @felixarntz updated

```

> # Amending the check result object

Reviewer 2: Can you move this section further up, above "Add the Check to the Plugin Checker"? That would make more sense as the last section, since the section here still belongs to writing a check class.

Also please make sure to make this a H2, right now the heading level is incorrect and therefore problematic for accessibility.

Author: Thanks @felixarntz I've moved the section and updated the heading to h2

> The checks `run()` method will hold all the logic to test the plugin and raise any warnings or errors that are found.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The check's `run()` method will hold all the logic to test the plugin and raise any warnings or errors that are found.
```

Author: Updated

> The run method accepts an instance of the `Check_Results` class which is used to add messages to the results list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The run method accepts an instance of the `Check_Result` class which is used to add errors and warnings to the results list.
```

Author: Updated

The warnings and errors are added via the `add_message()` method which accepts 3 parameters.

- `$error (bool)` - Whether the message is an error or warning. True for error, false for warning.
- `$message (string)` - The error/warning message.
- `$args (array)` - Additional message arguements to add context.
  - `$code (string)` - Violation code according to the message. Default empty string.
  - `$file (string)` - The file in which the message occurred. Default empty string (unknown file).
  - `$line (int)` - The line on which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown line).
  - `$column (int)` - The column on which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown column).

> In addition to adding messages, the `Check_Result` instance also provides access to the `Plugin_Context`. The plugin context is useful for getting the plugins path and urls when performing checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to adding messages, the `Check_Result` instance also provides access to the plugin's `Check_Context`. The plugin context is useful for getting the plugin's path and URL when performing checks.
```

Author: Updated

> Below is an example showing how to access the plugin context and add messages using the `Check_Results` instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is an example showing how to access the plugin context and add messages using the `Check_Result` instance.
```

Author: Updated

# Creating a Static Check

Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugin's codebase.

> Static checks analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.

Reviewer 2: Would be good to mention the `Static_Check` interface here, as currently it's going right to the code example without that context. You can use the same explanation you have in the runtime check docs.
```suggestion
Static checks analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.

The Plugin Checker provides the `Static_Check` interface, which is used to identify a static check. This interface does not contain any methods but serves as a marker for static checks.
```

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Static_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

class My_Custom_Check implements Static_Check {

  use Stable_Check;
  
  public function get_categories() {
    // Return an array of check categories.
    // See the `WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories` class for available categories.
  }

  public function run( Check_Result $result );
    // Handle running the check and adding warnings or errors to the result.
  }
}
```

Here are two more concrete ways to write static checks.

## Creating a new check using PHP CodeSniffer

A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class. Here is an example:

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Checks\Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

/**

>  * Check for running WordPress internationalization sniffs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Check for detecting incorrect casing of the word "WordPress" using PHP CodeSniffer.
```

 */
class My_Custom_Check extends Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check {
  
  use Stable_Check;

  /**
   * Gets the categories for the check.
   *
   * Every check must have at least one category.
   *
   * @since n.e.x.t
   *
   * @return array The categories for the check.
   */
  public function get_categories() {
    return array( Check_Categories::CATEGORY_GENERAL );
  }

  /**
   * Returns an associative array of arguments to pass to PHPCS.
   *
   * @return array An associative array of PHPCS CLI arguments.
   */
  protected function get_args() {
    return array(
      'extensions' => 'php',
      'standard'   => 'WordPress',
      'sniffs'     => 'WordPress.WP.CapitalPDangit',
    );
  }
}
```

## Creating a new check using file search for strings / regular expressions

A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_File_Check` class. Here is an example:

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

/**

>  * Check for detecting "Wordpress" in plugin files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Check for detecting incorrect casing of the term "WordPress" (specifically "Wordpress") using string search in files.
```

 *
 * @since n.e.x.t
 */
class My_Custom_Check extends Abstract_File_Check {

	use Stable_Check;

	/**
	 * Gets the categories for the check.
	 *
	 * Every check must have at least one category.
	 *
	 * @since n.e.x.t
	 *
	 * @return array The categories for the check.
	 */
	public function get_categories() {
		return array( Check_Categories::CATEGORY_PLUGIN_REPO );
	}

	/**
	 * Check the "Wordpress" in files.
	 *
	 * @since n.e.x.t
	 *
	 * @param Check_Result $result The Check Result to amend.
	 * @param array        $files  Array of plugin files.
	 */

> 	protected function check_files( Check_Result $result, array $files ) {
>     // Get all php files in the plugin.
> 		$php_files = self::filter_files_by_extension( $files, 'php' );
> 
>     // Check files for instances of the "Wordpress".
> 		$file = self::file_str_contains( $php_files, 'Wordpress' );

Reviewer 2: Incorrect indentation here:
```suggestion
	protected function check_files( Check_Result $result, array $files ) {
    	// Get all php files in the plugin.
		$php_files = self::filter_files_by_extension( $files, 'php' );

    	// Check files for instances of the "Wordpress".
		$file = self::file_str_contains( $php_files, 'Wordpress' );
```

# Creating a Static Check

> Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugin's codebase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Static checks are employed to conduct static analysis on a plugin's codebase.
```

> Static checks analyze the code, either using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic e.g. using regular expressions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Static checks analyze the code, either by using PHP CodeSniffer sniffs or custom logic, such as regular expressions.
```

> The Plugin Checker provides the `Static_Check` interface, which is used to identify a static check. This interface does not contain any methods but serves as a marker for static checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Plugin Checker offers the `Static_Check` interface, which serves to identify a static check. This interface does not include any methods but acts as a marker for static checks.
```

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Static_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

class My_Custom_Check implements Static_Check {

  use Stable_Check;
  
  public function get_categories() {
    // Return an array of check categories.
    // See the `WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories` class for available categories.
  }

  public function run( Check_Result $result ) {
    // Handle running the check and adding warnings or errors to the result.
  }
}
```

> Here are two more concrete ways to write static checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are two more specific approaches to writing static checks.
```

## Creating a new check using PHP CodeSniffer

> A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class. Here is an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create the static check, you should develop a new class that extends the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class. Below is an example:
```

```php
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Result;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Check_Categories;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Checker\Checks\Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check;
use WordPress\Plugin_Check\Traits\Stable_Check;

/**
 * Check for detecting incorrect casing of the word "WordPress" using PHP CodeSniffer.
 */
class My_Custom_Check extends Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check {
  
  use Stable_Check;

  /**
   * Gets the categories for the check.
   *
   * Every check must have at least one category.
   *
   * @since n.e.x.t
   *
   * @return array The categories for the check.
   */
  public function get_categories() {
    return array( Check_Categories::CATEGORY_GENERAL );
  }

  /**
   * Returns an associative array of arguments to pass to PHPCS.
   *
   * @return array An associative array of PHPCS CLI arguments.
   */
  protected function get_args() {
    return array(
      'extensions' => 'php',
      'standard'   => 'WordPress',
      'sniffs'     => 'WordPress.WP.CapitalPDangit',
    );
  }
}
```

## Creating a new check using file search for strings / regular expressions

> A new class should be created for the static check, extending the `Abstract_File_Check` class. Here is an example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create the static check, you should develop a new class that extends the `Abstract_File_Check` class. Below is an example:
```

 *
 * @since n.e.x.t
 */
class My_Custom_Check extends Abstract_File_Check {

  use Stable_Check;

  /**
   * Gets the categories for the check.
   *
   * Every check must have at least one category.
   *
   * @since n.e.x.t
   *
   * @return array The categories for the check.
   */
  public function get_categories() {
    return array( Check_Categories::CATEGORY_PLUGIN_REPO );
  }

  /**
   * Check the "Wordpress" in files.
   *
   * @since n.e.x.t
   *
   * @param Check_Result $result The Check Result to amend.
   * @param array        $files  Array of plugin files.
   */
  protected function check_files( Check_Result $result, array $files ) {
    // Get all php files in the plugin.
    $php_files = self::filter_files_by_extension( $files, 'php' );

    // Check files for instances of the "Wordpress".
    $file = self::file_str_contains( $php_files, 'Wordpress' );

    if ( $file ) {
      $result->add_message(
        true,
        __( 'Please spell "WordPress" correctly.', 'plugin-check' ),
        array(
          'code' => 'misspelled_wordpress_in_files',
          'file' => $file,
        )
      );
    }
  }
}
```

## Amending the check result object

> The check's `run()` method will hold all the logic to test the plugin and raise any warnings or errors that are found.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `run()` method of the check will encompass all the logic required to test the plugin and raise any warnings or errors that are detected.
```

More engaging, easier to read.

> The run method accepts an instance of the `Check_Result` class which is used to add errors and warnings to the results list.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `run` method accepts an instance of the `Check_Result` class, enabling the addition of errors and warnings to the results list.
```

Better indicates the purpose of the run method, better flow and consistency.

> The warnings and errors are added via the `add_message()` method which accepts 3 parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The warnings and errors are added using the `add_message()` method, which accepts three parameters.
```

> - `$error (bool)` - Whether the message is an error or warning. True for error, false for warning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `$error (bool)` - Whether the message is an error or warning. `true` for error, `false` for warning.
```

- `$message (string)` - The error/warning message.

> - `$args (array)` - Additional message arguements to add context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `$args (array)` - Additional message arguments to add context.
```

Spelling error.

>   - `$code (string)` - Violation code according to the message. Default empty string.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `$code (string)` - The violation code associated with the message. Default is an empty string.
```

>   - `$file (string)` - The file in which the message occurred. Default empty string (unknown file).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `$file (string)` - The file for which the message occurred. Default empty string (unknown file).
```

I am not sure if this is correct, but I assume it's the file that triggered the error message, not that the message was _in_ correct?

>   - `$line (int)` - The line on which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown line).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `$line (int)` - The line for which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown line).
```

Same comment as above.

>   - `$column (int)` - The column on which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown column).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `$column (int)` - The column for which the message occurred. Default 0 (unknown column).
```

Same comment as above.

> In addition to adding messages, the `Check_Result` instance also provides access to the plugin's `Check_Context`. The plugin context is useful for getting the plugin's path and URL when performing checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to adding messages, the `Check_Result` instance also grants access to the plugin's `Check_Context` instance, which proves useful for retrieving the plugin's path and URL during check execution.
```

Slightly better readability.

> Below is an example showing how to access the plugin context and add messages using the `Check_Result` instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is an example demonstrating how to access the plugin context and add messages using the `Check_Result` instance.
```

More descriptive and engaging tone.

```php
/**
 * Runs the check on the plugin and amends results.
 *
 * @since n.e.x.t
 *
 * @param Check_Result $result The check results to amend and the plugin context.
 */
public function run( Check_Result $result ) {

  // Get the absolute file path for a specific file in the plugin.
  $plugin_file = $result->plugin()->path( 'plugin-file.php' );

  // Run logic to test the plugin for warnings/errors...

  // When an issue is found add a warning.
  $result->add_message(
    false, 
    'Warning message content.', 
    array(
      'code'   => 'warning_code',
      'file'   => $pluging_file,
      'line'   => 1,
      'column' => 10,
    )
  );
}
```

> ## Add the Check to the Plugin Checker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Adding the Check to the Plugin Checker
```

> In order to run the check as part of the Plugin Checker process, it needs to be added to the Plugin Checker's list of available checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To include the check as part of the Plugin Checker process, it must be added to the Plugin Checker's list of available checks.
```

Slightly more concise.

> - If you're contributing to the actual plugin checker, add the check to the list in the `Abstract_Check_Runner::register_checks()` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you're contributing to the Plugin Checker, add the check to the list in the `Abstract_Check_Runner::register_checks()` method.
```

> - If you're implementing a check in code outside of the actual plugin checker, use the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter, as seen in the example below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you're implementing a check in code outside of the Plugin Checker, use the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter, as seen in the example below.
```

# Creating a Static Check

> Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugins codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Static checks are used to perform static analysis against a plugin's codebase.
```

> The Plugin Checker uses PHPCS to perform static checks against a plugin and provides the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check` class to help create additional static checks that use PHPCS sniffs.

Reviewer 2: This is not quite correct. Static checks _can_ use PHPCodeSniffer, but they don't have to. The only thing they have to do is implement the `Static_Check` interface, which is not mentioned here. For example, a static check could use a completely custom implementation, or rely on the base class from #174.

Let's separate the actual requirements from alternative / common ways to write static checks.

It would also be really good to visualize with a very simple code sample like you already have in the runtime check documentation, just something like `class Custom_Check implements Static_Check { ...`

> ## Creating a new Check class

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, this section is only focused on writing a check using PHPCodeSniffer, so I think it would be best to rename the heading to clarify that. We should separately include a section outlining checks that use the `Abstract_File_Check` class from #174.

Both of those sections should probably be differentiated by a sentence before, something like "here are two more concrete ways to write static checks", while still clarifying that neither of them are required to use.

This is done by implementing the `get_args()` method in the new Check class defined within the `Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check`.

The `get_args()` method should return an associative array containing the PHPCS arguments including the file extension, code standard and specific sniff to run.

Below is an example of a Static Check class that checks for i18n usage in the plugins codebase.

```php
/**
 * Check for running WordPress internationalization sniffs.
 */
class I18n_Usage_Check extends Abstract_PHP_CodeSniffer_Check {

	/**
	 * Returns an associative array of arguments to pass to PHPCS.
	 *
	 * @return array An associative array of PHPCS CLI arguments.
	 */
	protected function get_args() {
		return array(
			'extensions' => 'php',
			'standard'   => 'WordPress',
			'sniffs'     => 'WordPress.WP.I18n',
		);
	}
}
```

## Add the Check to the Plugin Checker

In order to run the check as part of the Plugin Checker process it needs to be added to the Plugin Checkers list of available checks.

> This is done by using the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter to register an instance of the Check with it's slug.

Reviewer 2: Typo here, but more importantly, this is the way to do it only when implementing in another tool. It would be great to mention both ways:
* If you're contributing to the actual plugin checker, add the check to the list in the `Abstract_Check_Runner::register_checks()` method.
* If you're implementing a check in code outside of the actual plugin checker, use the approach you've described here so far.
```suggestion
This is done by using the `wp_plugin_check_checks` filter to register an instance of the check with its slug.
```

```php
add_filter(
  'wp_plugin_check_checks',
  function ( array $checks ) {
    // Add the check to the map of all available checks.
    $checks[ 'i18n_usage' ] = new I18n_Usage_Check();

    return $checks;
  }

> )

Reviewer 2: Missing closing marks here for the code.
